you refer to a default modee Network
what is that this was one of the biggest
findings in cognitive Neuroscience in a
generation the brain wants to mind
wander are you suggesting that we made
sounds if we don't yet have words or
language as we now think of it the
available evidence is that the neural
structures that encode music are
phenetically older than those that
encode speech wow so evolutionarily we
were musicians before we were talking to
one another from a brain development
standpoint
[Music]
yes this is Star Talk Neil degrass Tyson
here your personal astrophysicist and I
got with me Chuck Nice Chuck how you
doing man hey Neil all right okay this
is Star Talk special edition it is and
if if I've got you for Star Talk special
Edition we also get Gary that's right in
this Edition Gary O'Reilly is going to
take us in Gary what do you have to tell
us generally speaking music is a
pleasure we appreciate the Artistry and
enjoy the performance music can
transport us to another time and place
alter our emotional state now ask
yourself what throws an audience into a
trance or a performer into a flow
State why do we get awms that nasty
little rascals and they're
annoying they are just some of music's
gifts the ancient Greeks knew way back
when that music has the power to heal so
we're talking the cognitive Neuroscience
of music and for that we need someone
very special whose range is nothing
short of
extensive Daniel leverton PhD a
cognitive neuroscientist with expertise
in music
and psychology multi-million bestselling
author with another just out a musician
a record producer and an engineer
working with some of the best in the
business and I mean the best and I am
just scratching the surface when I say
that he has won loads of awards for
loads of stuff so Neil enjoy the show
sorry I can't be there Co stopped me but
uh I know you're going to have a great
great time and it's going to be a
fantastic show thanks Gary again sorry
you can't be with us so Daniel Levon
Daniel welcome to start talk thank you
for having me Neil yeah listen dude
you've done everything in your life I
haven't done an interview with you yet
okay and now you can
die so you're here primarily because you
just released a book yeah and we're
going to talk a bit about that but
mostly just about the human brain and
music when we look at your background
starting out as a music producer and you
knew everybody anybody who's anybody
this book connects music and
neurological Health y maybe we kind of
knew it well but this book all 350 pages
of it is it's 412 you didn't read the
notes at the
end good that was good I read 4,000
peer-reviewed articles so you wouldn't
have to and they're in the notes very
good that's why we bu the books yeah so
you analyze and put into narrative
something we always suspected was true
but didn't really have evidence for it
right and so let's just start from
Square One the movie Close Encounters of
the Third Kind we communicate with those
aliens initially with musical tones yeah
it makes the Bold assumption that aliens
can hear right this is a sense that we
have and we're just assuming other life
forms will have it they might have some
other
that we
don't so that's our bias it's F to see
what biases we put on our aliens plus
they were bipedal they had a head two
eyes a nose and mouth ears okay that's
our bi they also had lousy Taste of
music because they actually like that
song that we played them it was awful
all four notes
yeah but there is this idea of five
notes there is this idea that a
sufficiently advanced technology Society
will have things like the Fibonacci
series or a geometric series powers of
two and so the idea that there might be
some universal language math would have
been the obvious one not so entertaining
for a Spielberg movie to have perhaps
they have prime numbers popping up
that's right right right that's it would
have totally fed the Geeks in the world
we would have flocked to the film can
you comment on why we care at all about
music what we do know you know music
being
auditory uh doesn't leave the same kind
of Trace as say cave paintings right so
a lot of this is speculation when you
say tra the same historical evidence
archaeological physical evidence right
although we do have bone flutes that are
dated between 40 and 60,000 years ago oh
wow and they've been found not just in
well you just said that like that's a
thing you mean someone took a femur
carved it out and blew air through it
and made a flute yes you just said a
bone flute like get in the corner H yeah
you know shut up I shut up cuz there are
many many jokes that go with bone flute
but you are exactly right to point this
out because yes somebody had to find a
femur right and drill holes in it at
precisely spaced intervals right to get
particular pictures they're 40 to 60,000
years old they're among the oldest
artifacts we find in human burial sites
I'm guessing they might have done this
with wood CU it's easier but wood
doesn't last as long going to say
calcifi califi bone be here wood wood
would turn to dust yes and so the
interesting thing is okay well if they
went to that much trouble to have this
technological thing you know of of
drilling the holes however they did it
the bone flute wouldn't have been the
first musical instrument they would have
been stretching skins across stumps they
would have been beating their chest
Bobby mcfarren style this is perfectly
reasoned the bone flute requires
sufficient effort right that surely
there were other instruments made with
less effort before you got to that and
didn't last okay right yes and it makes
sense because there are other
instruments that happen without you
doing anything but singing yeah singing
banging two can be can keep a beat early
rock
music I see what you did there or if
they had any Coke bottles you just at
the time okay so we agree it existed we
agree it's ask then the question why so
in my field we have a journal called
behavioral and brain sciences and it's a
interesting model for a peer review
journal somebody writes a Target article
I don't know if they have this in
astrophysics uh somebody writes a Target
article and then other people around the
world who are qualified in the field get
to write commentaries on it peer rev and
those commentaries are peer- reviewed so
you have an idea put forward and then
maybe 40 or 50 people weighing in on
what they think about it do you have
this not really it's a wonderful thing
because well we do have in in the
journal Nature right we have you can
write an article and the article is a
little bit controversial the editor will
solicit a comment on it I've written
some of those okay so beyond that no we
don't it's not a a free-for-all as you
describe the nice thing is that it helps
a field to cohere into some kind of a
consensus almost a town hall yeah then
the target article people get to write a
response to the yeah so I mentioned this
because in 2019 there were a couple of
Target articles about The Evolution of
Music and this is something I devoted a
whole book to in 2008 the world in six
songs the subtitle was how the musical
brain created human nature and the idea
was you know like so many things with
Evolution as you've explained to the
public better than anyone can things
don't evolve typically for a single
reason or a single purpose there's
there's a bunch of different
evolutionary pressures and in the case
of Music there were at least six
independent lines of why music became
important and encoded in the genome and
passed down not just culturally but
genetically give me the the most
significant one that has to do with
survival I am not uh qualified to I'm
not six y me one of the six I will you
asked me to rank order I'm not an
evolutionary biologist okay give me any
of the six okay my favorite of the six
okay there you go your favorite think
about the transmission of information
within a culture and across Generations
now we do that by talking but we also
write things down we've only had written
language on this planet for about 5,000
years in fact it almost defines history
well that's right absolutely but you
know humans have been on the planet for
40 to 100 or 200,000 years longer than
that depending on how you define human
and so for most of the time we've been
on the planet we did not have writing
and what we believe from studying
contemporary hunter gatherer societies
that are cut off from Western
civilization and industrialization we
have every reason to believe they're
living the way they might have 20,000
years ago we believe that they used
music to encode knowledge for example
it's a learning they would have a song
that would encode this is the root to
the well right and this is the roote you
take to the other well if this one goes
dry or a song that says don't go over
that mountain because great-grandfather
OG went there and the neighboring tribe
killed him and this is how you make a
watertight canoe or this is how you boil
a plant so it's not poison why music
because first of all the available
evidence from my lab and now many others
around the world what's your lab by the
way at Mill University Mill up in Canada
yeah yes okay the uh laboratory for
music cognition and expertise the the
available evidence is that the neural
structures that encode music are
phenetically older than those that
encode speech wow so evolutionarily we
were musicians before we were talking to
one another that's what so it seems from
from a from a brain development
standpoint yes and Steven Myan has
written a wonderful book called The
Singing neanderthals MH where he posits
that some sort of Proto language was
music sounds like a great Punk Group by
sing the singing yeah are you suggesting
that we made sounds if we don't yet have
words that we could imagine writing or
language as we now think of it sounds
can be put together into musical yeah so
there's two parts to this let's talk
about sound without language and sound
with language and if you don't mind I'll
go backwards in time do so once we had
language and we set the language to
music once we had words that we set to
music those words would become encoded
and preserved in memory uh with far
greater resistance to Distortion oh my
God right because you've got the
mutually reinforcing cues of Rhythm
accent structure meter and rhyme scheme
so that there's a limited number of ways
that you can fit words into that
space and so you look at the ilad and
the Odyssey which were orally
transmitted very very long poems the Old
Testament the Bible uh yeah Psalms are
all songs that's right and the Old
Testament was sung right before it was
ever written down for a thousand years
and preserved as far as we know fairly
accurately and so songs are able to
resist to a large degree distortions
that simple speech is not makes perfect
sense simply because we teach all of our
children in song first the ABCs yes all
of your nursery rhymes are sung little
kids learn the body parts through a song
right you put your right foot in you put
your right foot out put right foot in
you turn head shoulders knees and toes
knees and toes everything we learn as a
kid we I mean a lot of what we learn is
s that explains why it would have had
evolutionary value because we can
remember lessons yes for where the water
hole is where the food how to not get
eaten right it's like the equivalent of
the be dance we sang like bees dance
that's how they give direction yeah yeah
and that's how we give the bees do the
waggle the wagle wag so so might you
then suggest that among vertebrates at
least Birds engage in song in this oh
well whale song we call them songs maybe
they're just angry and they're
complaining well this is this is really
humans which is the whale equivalent to
get off my lawn get get the hell off my
planet or I've got
lomago so just to sharpen my question
what other animals offer any evidence at
all for musicality if not Birds when we
think of bird song whales when we think
of whale song or other creatures that
make what we think of as melodic sounds
to one another so this's a very um
contentious question in the ethology
community remind me what ethology is uh
the study of animal behavior that's
called ethology is it not no I don't
know uh biology let's say no but
ethology yeah ethology animal behavior
yeah cool thank you so let's look at the
characteristics of Human music for one
thing we'll sing when we're all by
ourselves Birds won't birds will only
sing if they know there's another con
specific nearby bird and whale song is
communicative it's when when we speak to
one another we are speaking with a
specific intention usually and we're
referring to things all the animal calls
that we know of are referential to some
event in the world they're either a
meeting call or a call to distress hey
everybody look out there's a predator
here or hey there's some food over here
uh they are specific stereotyped
Communications that are used in the
presence of others they aren't for the
most part changeable we have an infinite
variety of songs birds do not they're
not riffing on a right a Melody I have a
bird song identifier on my
on my smartone and the only reason it
works is because they can pull it out of
the sound and because they don't change
the song right right because you can it
could be a noisy environment but if
there's a bird in there it will find
that bird and the bird in New York and
its Offspring and a bird in Illinois and
a bird in Brazil if it's the same
species they're going to sing more or
less the same song their whole lives and
it's encoded and you know how we know
this my colleague Evan Balaban did a
study he took embryonic I don't remember
the
let's well he took yeah he he took he
took eggs emic bir he took fertile he
took that's an egg the egg is an embrio
right well yeah he took fertile eggs
okay let's say it's a chicken and he
gets the auditory cortex of a zebra
finch and he implants it in the
developing brain of the chicken wait is
the Zebra Finch a zebra or a finch it's
a finch it's kind of kind of a bird a
song bird I'm just being literal here
cuz you know you'll name stuff you know
zebra finch take a sber auditory cortex
and puts it in the developing brain and
vice versa it's not zebra that looks
like a finch it's a finch that has zebra
stripes exactly exactly right got and so
the question is are birds learning their
song from their parents and from the
environment or is it hardwired and what
he found was the chickens started
singing the song of the finches and the
finches started clucking like chickens
oh because it's hardwired that sounds
like a great Pixar movie
somebody mixed up the eggs at the
beginning you're not a chicken I'll be a
chicken if I want to I could be whatever
I want the chicken
goes scramble the farm animals that'll
mess up the farm so these are
hardwired uh actions in these anim for
everybody else right but not for us not
for us everything that we know about
animal communication is that it's not
music the way we would Define music it's
not infinitely generative you can't
model with a Markov chain is there any
evidence that we have always enjoyed
music as entertainment because you know
when you talk about it becomes this
directional medium it's a medium of
Direction where we're telling each other
stories or we're giving each other you
know information at what point do we
have proof or evidence historically that
it went from that which it still is
which we just determined
to man This Is My Jam I love this so
much what a great song and well so one
of the other uses of music is to create
a bond between mother and infant because
the infant would imprint on the mother's
singing voice and we now know that
relaxing comforting song can release
prolactin which is a soothing and
tranquilizing hormone so we've got a
number of different reasons why music
was there and they're subserved by
different neurochemical system systems
this works even in utero yeah so by the
age of 20 weeks the auditory system is
fully functional wow and the fetus can
hear sounds it's through the amniotic
fluid it would be like it would change
the frequency of it no it would not
change the frequency it would change
what frequencies you hear so if you put
your ears under water that the same
thing I I don't get the difference oh
well I mean it's not like a prism that
can change isn't it exactly that I can
change the frequency by speeding up tape
but if I simply play music in a
different medium it doesn't change the
frequency it changes which frequencies
are emphasized over others if you stick
your ears underwater in a swimming pool
or a bathtub and music is playing you'll
only hear the primarily hear the bass
notes though the frequency of those
baits notes hasn't shifted appreciably
although water is a different medum the
mayor but you could do the calculations
and see I think I have to think about
this okay okay let me table that for a
moment yeah so the value of a lullabi
for example
is not just soothing auditorally it's
soothing chemically as you described
yeah and what's the what is the chemical
prolactin prolactin and what does that
do it's a soothing tranquilizing hormone
that calms you
down a neuro hormone yeah so does
different music then activate different
parts of the brain yes holy moly music
activates every part of the brain that
we have so far mapped oh my goodness
that's astounding when you activates you
mean all parts of your brain respond but
not not all at once not to every piece
of music okay so m music reizes your
brain would this account for why because
they say this same of smells where you
can hear a piece of music and it takes
you right back to a time and a place and
you everything is explicit without you
even trying to summon that memory
depends on the music uh so uh by that I
mean the current theory of memory the
neurobiology of memory is that
everything you've experienced your
thought gets in your memory it's there
the problem is getting it out and so
what you need and to get a memory out is
what we call a retrieval queue and that
retrieval queue should be unique so if I
sing you happy birthday that's not going
to bring you back to a particular time
all associated with hundreds of I heard
that on my ninth birthday oh my God not
going to happen but if I play you na n
hey hey kiss him goodbye and you haven't
heard that in a long time or Tears of a
Clown or something that you associate
with a particular time in your life you
are brought back there because it's
uniquely associated with that time in
your life like PR's melins right okay or
a smell that's pretty cool I mean is
that why and then this just popped in my
head because what you just said Tony
Bennett had
Alzheimer's and the thing that they said
often about him was even when he was in
the midst of an episode where he could
not remember even that he was Tony
Bennett he could sing his songs you
could start playing I left my heart and
he would jump in yeah and then he would
start singing in St Louis
right almost worked that's messed up man
I know that's messed up we should
probably cut that I don't no don't cut
that that's that's hilarious that's St
Louis's comedy gold you kidding me but
so I mean do we I mean that that's
pretty wild is that the reason we saw it
with Glen Campbell too which is why he
was able to perform well into the
Affliction that he suffered yeah and
I've had the opportunity the privilege
to see his brain scans from when he was
on the tour half of his brain was
offline the Alzheimer's had really made
it so half of his brain literally half
his brain was not functioning but he was
still the best guitarist on the planet
arguably and could still remember the
songs he might do them two or three
times in a row cuz he couldn't remember
he had just done it but the act of doing
it was intact yes is he drawing from the
part of his brain that works he must be
well so the interesting thing about
brains is they are massively any
sentence that begins the interesting
thing about
brains is that
everything here's an uninteresting thing
about brains all right go on give tell
me something interesting about brains
they're massively redundant that's what
I came to learn in recent years so
whatever circuits there are they're
massively redundant uh and it makes
evoltion sense if you get a hit in the
head you don't want to lose the ability
to do important things the other thing
we talk about a lot in my field is
cognitive reserve and by analogy if
you're a marathon runner and you can run
26 miles on a bad day with covid and a
sprained ankle you can probably still
run five miles faster than I canh you've
got all this athletic Reserve built up
musculature uh air capacity not to
mention willpower right to work through
it musicians have cognitive Reserve in
the musical domain and they have so much
of it that you can lose lots and lots of
circuits and the other redundant
circuits are still intact interesting
and so what I said in my book successful
aging and reiterated it in this Chuck
when you lose half your brain you might
still be able to tell jokes I am right
now what are you talking about might be
able to this is how I've made my entire
living so the the expression if you had
half a brain you'd be dangerous I do
have half a brain
okay go I interrupted sorry go on if you
learn an instrument at an older age I
write about this in successful aging
which was the previous book but also
reiterated it here it's never too late
to learn an instrument NE if you're 70
80 not too late and I'll tell you a
story about that in a second but it's
neuroprotective you're neuroplasticity
is the fancy word for making new neural
Pathways right we do that our whole
lives if you if you ever heard that oh
you don't grow new neurons after a no
not true so even if you learn music at a
later age yeah that will help this
neuroplasticity it's neuroprotective and
it means that by building up all this
cognitive Reserve all these new Pathways
for one thing it's invigorating and and
you get a sense of agency and uh really
self-efficacy by learning something new
and you can then engage with some of the
greatest works made by some of the
greatest Minds in history the story of
my grandmother I think is a a very
person person Al illustration of this my
grandmother was born in Berlin in 1897
and had to leave under the under the
Nazis my grandmother escaped with her
three daughters and her husband the rest
of the family were all killed on her
80th birthday my grandmother uh told my
mother and I that she was so grateful to
be here in the United States to have
been able to raise three children here
to have a country that would take her in
and she said that she ever since she
came over in 1939 every single morning
in gratitude she sang God Bless America
a song written by another Jewish
immigrant Irving Berlin so she would
sing the song sing it so my mother and I
went out to Radio Shack and got her an
$80 keyboard electronic keyboard and we
put little pieces of tape on it with
numbers 1 2 3 4 5 six so she could play
the
melody and she played it every morning
and when we saw her on her 81st birthday
she had taken the tape off cuz she had
memor moriz the right hand part on her
82nd birthday she had worked out a
rudimentary harmony with the left hand
and she played that song every morning
until she died at
97 and I think that Having learned the
instrument having a way to Express
gratitude had a lot to do it's an N of
one but it's a very powerful experience
So Daniel you have a recent book uh
published with n
nton ww nton that's that's who your
publisher is yes anyone over 70 will get
that reference okay no yeah if you're
Eddie Murphy fan you'll get it too oh
yeah you'll get that from that one skit
he did yeah I'm with ww Norton I'm very
happy uh yeah yeah I have a few books
with ww nort that was one part of the
attraction for me oh is that right yeah
really yeah do I get 10%
no don't a bet the the Publishers uh so
in it which has a the beautiful title I
heard there was a secret chord it's
great that's a that's that's that
beautiful song by who wrote that the um
Leonard coh Leonard Cohen he's got that
I heard there was a secret cord that
pleased the Lord and he just hear it
it's like oh I gotta yeah it gives me
the not the Willies but even even
without knowing the song it makes you
feel very gwenth paltro
s you
know okay like I at this book for some
reason yeah it just it draws you to it
so yeah we should we should bundle this
with sales of goop yeah exactly exactly
so you you refer to a default mode
Network what is that this was one of the
biggest findings in cognitive
Neuroscience in a generation which was
the brain wants to mind wander now you
might say this is something we always
knew but you know a lot of things we
thought we knew turned out not to be
true and so the job of Behavioral
scientists we have a little bit easier
than uh than astrophysicists in that we
have 20,000 years of history of people
thinking that certain things are so and
then we can just test them and see if
they really are or not folktales and and
all the rest so the idea that the Mind
wants to
wander uh as opposed to paying attention
now has some neural biological uh basis
it takes energy to pay attention to
something and to keep your mind from
wandering and by energy I mean uh
neurons need to work harder they are
metabolized with blood oxygenated
glucose glucose is the fuel and your
brain is already a big consumer your
body's energy it so now even within that
now you're now dividing up the tasks for
who energy intensive and who isn't
paying attention to something being
engaged with something and making
decisions uses up glucose and to and the
phrase paying attention is actually
quite accurate you're you're paying with
glucose and it's a limited capacity re
Source when you've been paying attention
to something for a while your attention
Flags your brain your mind starts to
wander this is called the default mode
Network it was discovered by my
colleague and collaborator venod Menan
at Stanford and it's a very important
thing to understand because it's in the
default mode when our minds are
wandering that most problem solving gets
done now if you think about it it should
be obvious because um if I'm trying to
solve a problem and it eludes me it must
mean in most cases that the solution is
is nonlinear it's not just connecting a
to B two things that I knew it's having
to come up with a nonlinear solution and
those typically happen while we're
asleep and dreaming another
manifestation of the default mode as it
were because dreams can get really
random they can yeah but that's where
you get all this nonlinear out of the
box thinking or you're walking down the
supermarket aisle looking for the
Cheerios and suddenly it comes to you
the solution so getting into the default
mode happens automatically when we've
worked too hard unless we try to fight
it but you can get into it by doing
three things meditating walking in
nature or listening to music so I think
everything we've described thus far has
been known to us all the the mood
setting the memory jogging the what role
it can play in our states of Mind where
does medicine come in where there's
something wrong with you measured by
doctors and then
music fixes it or alleviates it so this
is the book I wanted to write 20 years
ago when I wrote this is your brain on
music but there was not enough evidence
for medical applications of music no
this is a good scientist speaking here
not enough evidence I'm not going to go
out there and do it no not at all okay
you know how many people don't think
that way and they start a YouTube
channel they get a all of them all of
them that's every YouTuber that you yeah
just turn on YouTube and you're looking
at that yes yeah no no the the evidence
was weak and I didn't want to go there
it's it's what you and I share I think
is a feeling of an ethical Commitment if
we're doing science and uh we're taking
grant money ultimately that either comes
from governmental agencies or from tax
breaks to private foundations meaning
the taxpayer fund scientific research
you and I believe that every scientist
has an ethical obligation to explain how
we're spending taxpayer money and so I
don't want to spend taxpayer money
saying stuff that ain't so so now we've
got this book yeah there's a lot of
foundation for your statements give me a
short list of some of the ailments that
have been alleviated by music I'll start
with Wellness so music boosts the immune
system particularly immunoglobuline a
IGA is responsible for fighting off
infections of the mucosal system which
is covid or colds music also boosts the
production of natural killer cells andk
cells and tea cells which travel to the
site of an to fight an infection the
most sickly people in the world people
who never listen to music is that well
we is the inverse true as well we well
we're talking about significant uh but
small effects I mean and certainly there
are always exceptions in the tales of
the distribution course so quantify your
statement that it improves your
resistance your Wellness quantify that
you mean like P less than .05 no I mean
how much of an effect does it have on
your immune system for example it can
boost the immune system uh better than
say eonia or vitamin C or all these
things that people all right so if I
might have gotten five colds this year
and I listen to music would I get four
colds we don't know we don't know the
these well you get five colds but they
just won't be as bad well well well
that's right I mean that can happen too
yeah we don't really know uh and I can't
I don't want to claim that we do okay
but we know in clinical studies and in
laboratory studies that IGA for example
NK and T cells are increased now at that
point Point whether they're successful
at fending off a disease or not there's
a lot of other variables okay so there
one thing to say that these things are
improved yes and it's separate to
actually do the clinical trials but
there is a logical progression though
You' expect it be Cas you expect the
loog logical right so that's one thing
so your Wellness Parkinson's
disease Parkinson's disease is
characterized by a degradation of cells
in the basil ganglia I've seen brain
Maps brain back here yeah at the
underneath there basil gangang ganglia
yeah a group of subcortical nuclei that
are connected to the brain's own
internal clock so what happens is uh
dopamine is normally used for signaling
and transmission of information in this
cluster of neurons wa in dopamine in a
Feelgood it's a Feelgood chemical
neurochemical neurochemical well so
that's an interesting thing dopamine is
throughout the brain and it does
different things in different parts of
the brain interesting when you're
experiencing pleasure and dopamine is
released in the lyic system including
the ventral tag menal area you feel
pleasure so dopamine does different
things in different places and it helps
to maintain a steady gate and
synchronized circuits that are required
for for walking for movement uh and
that's degraded in Parkinson's and so we
give them lopo which is supposed to
promote dopamine just to be clear when
Parkinson's is Advanced enough you're
basically wheelchair bound right and it
starts the first signs might be
shuffling when you're walking dragging
your feet um an inability to maintain a
steady gate sometimes you try to walk
and you end up running sometimes you
walk and you end up freezing or you
can't get started this is called Fen
station and what we find is that if you
play music for people that's at the
tempo of their natural
gate that activates a subsidiary
redundant circuit so we've got
populations of neurons that fire in
synchron to music that entrain to the
music and predict where the next beat's
going to be right and that allows
Parkinson's patients to walk smoothly
there's a technique called rism rhythmic
auditory stimulation developed by a
colleague of mine named Michael tout at
University of Toronto he was at Colorado
State when he developed it and let me
guess that's where you play the bgs you
can tell by the way I use my walk that's
exactly right and or any music by in
sync
you play the music at the right Tempo
and the neurons start firing and they
can maintain a steady gate and after a
course of this therapy some Parkinson's
patients are able to give get rid of
their crutches and Walkers and walk for
months whoa so this music is a way to
get in the brain without having to do so
pharmacologically cuz I I can imagine a
future where wait a minute that other
part of the brain remembers how you used
to walk and it's being overridden by
this let me go in there Nip Tuck
suppress this boost that and now you're
done maybe that day will come yes but
until then your music is filling that
Gap yeah that's right another
interesting case is chronic pain or
acute pain any kind of pain okay tell me
about that so pain is a $680 million
drain on the annual economy in the US oh
well then music is doesn't stand a
chance it's the number one reason people
I'm surprised it's only 680 million yeah
I mean when you think of painkillers
pain relievers pain people with chronic
pain right and the
whole it's all about pain manag cons
conservative number yeah it's the number
one re reason people go to the doctor
doctors report that 80% of their
patients come in and say it hurts here
that 80% of doctor visits it hurts how
do we treat pain we use two things that
we've been using for thousands of years
the bark of a tree or its synthetic
equivalence which is aspirin or you know
something from a poppy uh or synthetic
equivalent heroin opiates opium my lab
was the first to show that when people
listen to music they like doesn't matter
whether it's heavy metal or hip-hop or
classical or Jazz R&B if it's music they
like the brain produces its own
endogenous opiates remind me what
endogenous means internal to the brain
its own you could just said internal we
use the word endogenous because we're
fancy you know in my field we see spots
on the sun we call them sun spots huh
okay we like tell it like we see it but
the sun calls them endogenous
sunspots okay so it's endogenous keep
going the brain's producing its own
opioids uh and they help to ease pain
now it's not producing them in
pharmaceutical levels but in sufficient
levels that instead of having an
oxicontin addiction you might have been
able to get away with say an Advil and
music or maybe a very small much smaller
dose of opiates for a much shorter
amount of time the whole opioid crisis
could potentially have been averted
whether it anesthetizes you it can
definitely help with pain management
that's the point right if you do it in
you can do it either way it can either
it can be the painkiller or it can just
assist the painkiller it doesn't make a
difference that's right it doesn't make
a difference wow yeah how about any
other sort of
neurokinetic afflictions that might be
touched by music multiple sclerosis
arises you know the uh the neurons have
an insulating sheath like the wiring in
your house is insulated and it's because
they sending electrical signals and you
need the insulation so they don't
interfere with each other and all of
this the myelin sheath is a a white
fatty tissue which is why we call it
white matter and uh multiple sclerosis
is a loss of myelination ouch oo that
sounds terrible so so you have cross
circuits yeah short circuiting yeah of
your brain signals but music can help
with the movement disorders of multiple
sclerosis and another kind of movement
disorder is stuttering and it's mostly
in boys it is mostly in boys we don't
really know why but it's an inability to
speak smoothly and we think again it has
to do with timing circuits and an
internal clock gone
ay and music kind of hijacks the system
with a steady tempo isn't that helpful
for people such as yourself professional
neuroscientists to one day find a way to
get inside the brain and fix that
problem well we are inside the brain now
my colleague Eddie Chang and my other
colleague bob Knight both in California
and the San Francisco Bay Area have
implanted arrays of electrodes inside
I'm ready for that to fix everything
yeah well I mean it's it's astonishing
what what it's doing so the way this
happens is that there are people with
epilepsy which is uncontrolled
electrical activity that causes seizures
some of them volunteer to be in our
experiments and from that we can do in
human
what we've been doing for 100 years in
animals which is to measure from single
cells at a time and so you know it's not
far off well we will figure out where
the stuttering cells are and maybe be
able to treat it treat that and how
about Tourette's Syndrome yes yeah but
tell me about that tette disease is
debilitating it uh in almost every case
is accompanied by ticks unwanted motor
movements facial ticks and and body
jerking it's often thought of as the
disorder in which people swear
uncontrollably but that's not present in
all the cases I thought yeah I I read
somewhere that was the rarest of the
yeah it is oh that right that's the
rarest of Tourette's where people
actually swear uncontrol the ticks and
often what they do is make sounds
instead of swearing they like that's
right that's right you know something
like that music can help that too it
seems so uh so I write about um the
musician it seems so you're a scientist
sitting in my office here at the Hayden
planetarium don't you know you supposed
to
lie I don't ask you a question say well
it seems to be the case anybody could
say that tell me something out of your
lab that has some statistical Integrity
well so here we're talking about a
collection of anecdotes and the plural
of an anecdote is not data okay that's a
good line that was a very good line I
like that that's a good line but there
are a number of cases that
from anecdotes come studies so the case
of Billy ish is a perfect example
popular contemporary singer she has
tretts and she finds that when she's
singing the Tourette seems to go away
seems to because she's not keeping a log
she's not being observed and monitored
uh but from these observations of people
like Billy eish and others Grant
applications will go into the NIH I'm
part of a panel that's been working with
the NIH and the White House science yeah
yeah MH Francis Collins has been a big
promoter of this work though no longer
ah head of NIH is that correct he's he's
been in the White House Science office
now okay uh and he's working on
eradicating hepc but he convened a
meeting of uh 50 scientists in DC last
December on music and Medicine oh and uh
he entrusted me to help him choose the
scientists would be there we also
invited professional musicians you get
to tap some of that budget that's
allocated to a non traditional medicine
yeah so there's an Institute for
alternative and complimentary medicine
and emilene Edwards uh runs the place
and she is terrific because the nah has
a budget line oh they do for that right
yeah so they but it's also the National
Institute for neurological disorders and
stroke the ni the addiction agency
National Cancer Institute I think most
of the 26 institutes now are interested
in music is medicine for one thing
because it's a potentially a huge costs
saver and the best example of economy is
this if you go to get surgery it's
likely that in the pre-operating theater
they're going to give you valum a benzo
dipene to relax you before they
anesthetize you because knocking you out
and and relaxing you are two different
things they're not the same thing that
volume that might cost $5 at the CVS on
the corner or the Dwayne Reed or
whatever in a hospital the average cost
is you know what
$750 oh same pill same pill you've got
compliance you got regulations you've
got all kinds of reporting that needs to
be done and you've got you know
overhead it's ridiculous but a number of
Studies have now shown that if you play
people relaxing music that they
themselves chose this is an important
point you can't foist music therapy on
somebody using music they don't like
interesting that has the opposite effect
so I I'm intrigued that this is all in
progress and it's active it's an active
field of research all of this very much
so very much so last thing just to close
out where we're going here tell me about
memory how does memory
work like if I took a snapshot as a
physicist and I come to your brain and I
just look at the state of every neuron
am I going to know what Memories lurk
hidden within your
neurochemistry I used to know but I
forgot that was too easy
that was really
low low so low that was windfall on the
ground right that's not even right yes
that's called bending down and picking
up an apple it's not even low hanging it
matters when people claim or at least
hope that one day we can upload your
brain into a computer you have to upload
the configuration of every cell that is
storing information that we would call
memory right so uh this is the idea of
the connectome which Sebastian sung at
Princeton and others have been working
on that's a recent term right the
connect home yes and the idea is it's
parallel to the genome uh it's not
enough to know where all the neurons are
what they do you have to know how they
connect to one another and what state
they're in at any given time so what is
it about the state of your neurons that
preserves a memory so here's what we
think I mean this is this is
speculation when you experience
something for example you're looking at
a sunset you're listening to music
you're drinking a nice glass of red wine
that's an experience and it's the
experience is delivered to you beginning
with uh some stimulation impinging on
your sensory receptors setting off a
Cascade of neurochemical neuroelectrical
activity and so there's some group of
neurons that are delivering that
experience if it's wine it's the taste
buds uh and your olfactory system and
the olfactory bulb and it presents it to
somewhere in your brain that has
self-consciousness and awareness in the
the prefrontal cortex of what's
happening if you were to later remember
that experience uh as I say my lab and
other labs have shown that it's the same
neural family the same group of neurons
the same pattern that are activated in
the memory so what allows you to
distinguish a memory from an actual
event it appears we think there are
neurochemical tags that get attached to
an event when it gets stored in memory
so that when you pull it out you know
that it's a me memory and not an actual
event this is evolutionarily very
important because same thing happens
when you dream there are neurochemical
tags that say this is a dream because
otherwise I might dream that you punched
me in the nose and then I come to see
you and I don't know that that's not
reality and that could lead to another
punch in the nose I would say where's
the evidence yeah of you getting punched
in the nose yeah so what what then of
the what's that movie with Arnold was in
it um Total Recall total Total Recall
instead of paying for an expensive
vacation you would sit down in some
doctor's chair and they would implant
the memory of you having had the
vacation yeah yeah and that would be
just as good oh remember we were on the
beach and we found the shells and and
yeah that was great and it cost you 20
bucks instead of $2,000 my colleague
Danny and collaborator Danny Conan
recently passed away Nobel prizewinning
psychologist who won the Nobel in
economics for his study of studies of
how human beings um are irrational how
the brain is irrational and he
documented did he need to have a study
to show that we're irrational come on
now well he had he he cataloged the
different kinds of
irrationality that's pretty cool
okay it's not good enough just to know
we're all irrational what category
irrationality are you that's good work
there and one of them was that when
studying
vacations people were told you could
have the most fantastic vacation of your
life but you won't remember it
uh but it'll be free or it'll it'll be
not as good a vacation it'll cost you a
lot of money but you will remember it
which would you prefer people prefer to
have the one they can remember a big
part of going on vacation is not just to
have the anticipation of it but the
memory for years or decades later so you
get to an interesting point if you could
just have the memory but not the
experience I suppose that would be
something but I am still as a musician
as an artist I can't defend this
scientifically but I feel like a virtual
vacation an implanted vacation would be
like AI generated music it would be like
fake flowers at a hotel lobby looks fine
from a distance but when you get close
enough to realize it doesn't have a nice
scent or a nice texture you've got this
um uncanny valley between what is real
and what is not and you don't want the
false one well I've had enough
experiences in my life with where people
told me I had a good
time but I for sure cannot remember was
uh it was a single Mal Scotch
involved very much
so one last thing about memory I heard
about this when I was in college and I
assume but then I didn't hear about it
again that you are more likely to
remember something you learned by
reproducing the state of mind you were
in at the time you learned it so if
you're studying your chemistry book
while you're high you're better off
taking the exam while you're high yeah
is that true and that is why ladies and
gentlemen I failed out of
college you didn't smoke enough smoke
enough me this is called State dependent
memory retrieval it was discovered by my
one of my teachers Gordon Bower at
Stanford and when when did that happen
oh we discovered it in the 70s I'm I'm
I'm I'm old enough to have been in
college in the 70s and that's what I
remembered this coming out this was a
big finding I mean the idea is if you
study in one classroom uh you're going
to remember the material better if
you're tested in the same classroom and
it has to do again with retrieval cues
and he called it what he had a term
State dependent memory retrieval one of
the experiments they did was
parachuters H you learn a a bunch of
unrelated words while you're falling out
of an airplane and then you try to
recall it either on the ground or
falling out of an airplane again and it
turned out the finding wasn't as strong
as they thought uh because it was not
the actual
physical state of of being in an
airplane it was the state of arousal of
being that energized and okay so not a
complete duplicate of your scenario just
it's a duplication of your emotional
state emotional state but this is the
reason why depression is so hard to
treat people who are depressed only
remember the sad times of their lives
right it's very hard for them to get
access to the happy memories and they
think oh I was never happy which means
they can't draw upon those good times in
the face of bad times to counter it it's
just like oh it's everything's bad all
the time but music can help here one of
the promising things that I'm working on
with a group at UCLA is treating drug
resistant depression with drugs and talk
therapy and music and if you play
somebody who's depressed a happy song
that makes them feel worse if you're
depressed usually it's because in some
sense you feel misunderstood by the
world or by others or by people in your
life and you put on a happy song and
that's just one more person who does not
understand you and you're Furious why
you rubbing it in my face right you put
on a sad song and suddenly there's
somebody there staring into the abyss
with you at your side and not only do
they understand how you feel but they've
been through it and they came out the
other side and created a beautiful work
of
art So Daniel this has been a delight
thank you for having me here at theen
planetarium uh good luck with the tour
thank you very much chuck always good to
have you here always a pleasure and Gary
get well soon thanks for taking us into
this topic Neil degrass Tyson as always
bidding you to keep looking up
[Music]